The idea is to introduce a client secret policy part of client policies, similarly to password policies for users.
Initially it would not be extensible, but would be just a simple key/value configuration.

We'd have the following options in client secret policy to cover secret rotation. The options `Secret expiration`, `Rotated secret expiration` 
and `Remaining expiration for rotation during update` are applicable just if `Secret rotation enabled` is ON:

- **Secret rotation enabled: [boolean]**
- **Secret expiration: [seconds]** - When the secret is rotated, this is the expiration of time of the new secret
- **Rotated secret expiration: [seconds]** - When secret is rotated, this is the remaining expiration time for the old secret.
This value should be always smaller than `Secret expiration`. When this is set to 0, the old secret will be immediately removed
during client rotation.
- **Remaining expiration for rotation during update: [seconds]** - During dynamic client registration client-update request,
the client secret will be automatically rotated if the remaining expiration time of the current secret is smaller than the
value specified by this option. See the example below for more details. This configuration option is relevant only for dynamic client update
requests. It is not used for admin REST API (Admin Console) requests.

As these options are part of client policies it will be possible to define different values for different groups of clients.

Some additional options we may want to add in the future includes:

- **Allow supplying the secret through APIs.** If disabled all client secrets will be generated by Keycloak.
- **Length/complexity of the client secrets** if the above is enabled
- **Enable/disable hashing of secrets**, and configuring the hashing algorithm

By default secret rotation would not be enabled, and Keycloak would have the behaviour it currently has. We would add the
client secret creation time though.

If secret expiration is enabled a client secret is no longer valid if:
```
secret creation time + secret rotation >= current time.
```
We would also return the `client_secret_expires_at` in OIDC dynamic client registration, as well as the Keycloak Admin APIs.

If secret rotation is enabled the old client secret will be stored as a secondary client secret, and valid until rotated
secret expiration, or if explicitly removed. For the latter we would need an endpoint to support removing the secondary
client secret.

There will not be a background task that expires the secrets, nor will there be a background task that updates the secret.
Expiration of secrets will be done when the client is authenticating, and updating the secrets has to be initiated through client
update endpoints (in case of dynamic client registration), or with the request to update client secret (in case of KC admin APIs).

Examples
--------

As an example for dynamic client registration:

- Secret rotation is enabled, secret expiration is 30 days, rotated secret expiration is 2 days
- Client is created through a client registration request with a new generated secret
- 31 days later the client tries to authenticate, but the authentication is unsuccessful has KC sees the secret has expired
- Client is updated through a client update request, which will generate a new secret and return it in the response
- Client can now be updated and authentication is successful again

Another example for dynamic client registration

- Secret rotation is enabled, secret expiration is 30 days, rotated secret expiration is 2 days, Remaining expiration for rotation during update is 10 days.
- Client is created through a client registration request with a new generated secret
- 10 days later, client is updated with the call of OIDC client registration update request. At this point, there is 20 days for client secret to expire. Hence client secret won't be rotated during update
- Another 11 days later, client is updated again with OIDC client registration update request. At this point, there is only 9 days
of remaining time to client secret expiration. Since this is less than the `Remaining expiration for rotation during update`, the client secret will
be automatically updated. New secret will be returned in the response of client update request.

A similar example, but with KC Admin UI

- Same settings as above
- Client is created
- After 25 days the admin logs in to KC Admin UI can generates a new client secret
- The admin updates the client secret in the application
- The admin can now either log back in to the KC Admin UI and remove the rotated secret, or just leave it as it will be invalid after 2 days
- If the admin suspects a leak of the secret the admin should obviously remove the rotated secret

The changes needed in the Admin UI for a client would be:

- Show expiration time if applicable
- Show secondary secret and expiration time if applicable, and add button to remove secondary secret

This approach allows a global control over client secrets within a realm, and has less changes to the APIs, and is fully
backwards compatible as there would be no change to the default behaviour. It also fits better into dynamic client
registration than the previous proposal.
